This RCT examined the efficacy of a manualized social intervention for children with HFASDs. Participants were randomly assigned to treatment or wait-list conditions. Treatment included instruction and therapeutic activities targeting social skills, face-emotion recognition, interest expansion, and interpretation of non-literal language. A response-cost program was applied to reduce problem behaviors and foster skills acquisition. Significant treatment effects were found for five of seven primary outcome measures (parent ratings and direct child measures). Secondary measures based on staff ratings (treatment group only) corroborated gains reported by parents. High levels of parent, child and staff satisfaction were reported, along with high levels of treatment fidelity. Standardized effect size estimates were primarily in the medium and large ranges and favored the treatment group.
"Hepatitis C virus (HCV) and alcoholic liver disease (ALD), either alone or in combination, count for more than two thirds of all liver diseases in the Western world. There is no safe level of drinking in HCV-infected patients and the most effective goal for these patients is total abstinence. Baclofen, a GABA(B) receptor agonist, represents a promising pharmacotherapy for alcohol dependence (AD). Previously, we performed a randomized clinical trial (RCT), which demonstrated the safety and efficacy of baclofen in patients affected by AD and cirrhosis. The goal of this post-hoc analysis was to explore baclofen's effect in a subgroup of alcohol-dependent HCV-infected cirrhotic patients. Any patient with HCV infection was selected for this analysis. Among the 84 subjects randomized in the main trial, 24 alcohol-dependent cirrhotic patients had a HCV infection; 12 received baclofen 10mg t.i.d. and 12 received placebo for 12-weeks. With respect to the placebo group (3/12, 25.0%), a significantly higher number of patients who achieved and maintained total alcohol abstinence was found in the baclofen group (10/12, 83.3%; p=0.0123). Furthermore, in the baclofen group, compared to placebo, there was a significantly higher increase in albumin values from baseline (p=0.0132) and a trend toward a significant reduction in INR levels from baseline (p=0.0716). In conclusion, baclofen was safe and significantly more effective than placebo in promoting alcohol abstinence, and improving some Liver Function Tests (LFTs) (i.e. albumin, INR) in alcohol-dependent HCV-infected cirrhotic patients. Baclofen may represent a clinically relevant alcohol pharmacotherapy for these patients.
Mental illness, including depression, anxiety and bipolar disorder, accounts for a significant proportion of global disability and poses a substantial social, economic and heath burden. Treatment is presently dominated by pharmacotherapy, such as antidepressants, and psychotherapy, such as cognitive behavioural therapy; however, such treatments avert less than half of the disease burden, suggesting that additional strategies are needed to prevent and treat mental disorders. There are now consistent mechanistic, observational and interventional data to suggest diet quality may be a modifiable risk factor for mental illness. This review provides an overview of the nutritional psychiatry field. It includes a discussion of the neurobiological mechanisms likely modulated by diet, the use of dietary and nutraceutical interventions in mental disorders, and recommendations for further research. Potential biological pathways related to mental disorders include inflammation, oxidative stress, the gut microbiome, epigenetic modifications and neuroplasticity. Consistent epidemiological evidence, particularly for depression, suggests an association between measures of diet quality and mental health, across multiple populations and age groups; these do not appear to be explained by other demographic, lifestyle factors or reverse causality. Our recently published intervention trial provides preliminary clinical evidence that dietary interventions in clinically diagnosed populations are feasible and can provide significant clinical benefit. Furthermore, nutraceuticals including n-3 fatty acids, folate, S-adenosylmethionine, N-acetyl cysteine and probiotics, among others, are promising avenues for future research. Continued research is now required to investigate the efficacy of intervention studies in large cohorts and within clinically relevant populations, particularly in patients with schizophrenia, bipolar and anxiety disorders.
Various herbal medicines have been used around the world for more than 5,000 years. Herbal medicines, or herbal supplements, are defined as any products originating from plants and used to preserve or recover health. In the United States, the popularity of herbal supplements has increased in the last several decades. Many physicians do not ask patients about herbal supplement use, and one-third of patients do not inform their physician about supplement use. However, physicians should ask, because although many supplements are considered low risk and safe, some have significant risks of adverse effects. For example, St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum) can have significant drug interactions with prescription or over-the-counter drugs. The effectiveness of herbal supplements in the management of specific conditions varies. For some conditions, there is robust clinical data supporting the use of specific herbal supplements, but for other conditions there is poor or insufficient data. The content and safety of herbal supplements are the purview of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). However, the FDA primarily responds to after-the-fact reports of postmarketing safety concerns. When an herbal supplement-related adverse effect is suspected, patients or physicians should report it to the FDA via the MedWatch reporting system.
Background: Alcohol variants such as ethanol and methanol are simple organic compounds widely used in foods, pharmaceuticals, chemical synthesis, etc. Both are becoming an emerging health problem; abuse of ethanol containing beverages can lead to disparate health problems and methanol is highly toxic and unfit for consumption. Methods and results: This review summarizes the basic knowledge about ethanol and methanol toxicity, the effect mechanism on the body, the current care of poisoned individuals and the implication of alcohols in the development of diseases. Alcohol related dementia, stroke, metabolic syndrome and hepatitis are discussed as well. Besides ethanol, methanol toxicity and its biodegradation pathways are addressed. Conclusions: The impact of ethanol and methanol on the body is shown as case reports, along with a discussion on the possible implication of alcohol in Alzheimer's disease and antidotal therapy for methanol poisoning. The role of ethanol in cancer and degenerative disorders seems to be underestimated given the current knowledge. Treatment in case of poisoning is another issue that remains unresolved even though effective protocols and drugs exist.
Postpartum depression (PPD) is the most prevalent mood disorder associated with childbirth. No single cause of PPD has been identified, however the increased risk of nutritional deficiencies incurred through the high nutritional requirements of pregnancy may play a role in the pathology of depressive symptoms. Three nutritional interventions have drawn particular interest as possible non-invasive and cost-effective prevention and/or treatment strategies for PPD; omega-3 (n-3) long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LCPUFA), vitamin D and overall diet. We searched for meta-analyses of randomised controlled trials (RCT's) of nutritional interventions during the perinatal period with PPD as an outcome, and checked for any trials published subsequently to the meta-analyses. Fish oil: Eleven RCT's of prenatal fish oil supplementation RCT's show null and positive effects on PPD symptoms. Vitamin D: no relevant RCT's were identified, however seven observational studies of maternal vitamin D levels with PPD outcomes showed inconsistent associations. Diet: Two Australian RCT's with dietary advice interventions in pregnancy had a positive and null result on PPD. With the exception of fish oil, few RCT's with nutritional interventions during pregnancy assess PPD. Further research is needed to determine whether nutritional intervention strategies during pregnancy can protect against symptoms of PPD. Given the prevalence of PPD and ease of administering PPD measures, we recommend future prenatal nutritional RCT's include PPD as an outcome.
Mental illness, including depression, anxiety and bipolar disorder, accounts for a significant proportion of global disability and poses a substantial social, economic and heath burden. Treatment is presently dominated by pharmacotherapy, such as antidepressants, and psychotherapy, such as cognitive behavioural therapy; however, such treatments avert less than half of the disease burden, suggesting that additional strategies are needed to prevent and treat mental disorders. There are now consistent mechanistic, observational and interventional data to suggest diet quality may be a modifiable risk factor for mental illness. This review provides an overview of the nutritional psychiatry field. It includes a discussion of the neurobiological mechanisms likely modulated by diet, the use of dietary and nutraceutical interventions in mental disorders, and recommendations for further research. Potential biological pathways related to mental disorders include inflammation, oxidative stress, the gut microbiome, epigenetic modifications and neuroplasticity. Consistent epidemiological evidence, particularly for depression, suggests an association between measures of diet quality and mental health, across multiple populations and age groups; these do not appear to be explained by other demographic, lifestyle factors or reverse causality. Our recently published intervention trial provides preliminary clinical evidence that dietary interventions in clinically diagnosed populations are feasible and can provide significant clinical benefit. Furthermore, nutraceuticals including n-3 fatty acids, folate, S-adenosylmethionine, N-acetyl cysteine and probiotics, among others, are promising avenues for future research. Continued research is now required to investigate the efficacy of intervention studies in large cohorts and within clinically relevant populations, particularly in patients with schizophrenia, bipolar and anxiety disorders.
Evidence-based medicine, as described by Dr. Sackett, is defined as the "conscientious, explicit, and judicious use of current best evidence, combined with individual clinical expertise and patient preferences and values, in making decisions about the care of individual patients." In the late 2000s, seminal articles in Clinics in Plastic Surgery and Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery introduced evidence-based medicine's role in plastic surgery and redefined varying levels of evidence. The American Society of Plastic Surgeons sponsored the Colorado Springs Evidence-Based Medicine Summit that set forth a consensus statement and action plan regarding the increased incorporation of evidence-based medicine into the field; this key meeting ushered a new era among plastic surgeons worldwide. Over the past decade, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery has incorporated evidence-based medicine into the Journal through an increase in articles with level I and II evidence, new sections of the Journal, and the introduction of validated tools to help authors perform prospective and randomized studies that ultimately led to best practices used today. Plastic surgery is a specialty built on problem-solving and innovation, values starkly in-line with evidence-based medicine. Evidence-based medicine is becoming more ingrained in our everyday practice and plastic surgery culture; however, we must work actively to ensure that we continue this trend. In the next decade, we will possibly see that level I and II evidence articles start to inhabit many of our journal issues.
Despite widespread use, few empirical data on the efficacy of traditional medicine are available. We conducted systematic reviews of eight widely used African medicines and identified only one plant, Pelargonium sidoides, which has been extensively studied (including in a Cochrane systematic review). To address the need for rigorous science to underpin traditional medicine claims, the South African Herbal Science and Medicine Institute at the University of Western Cape launched the Multi-disciplinary University Traditional Health Initiative (MUTHI) in 2011. The European Union-funded initiative aims to build sustainable research capacity on plants for better public health in Africa. A 2011 needs analysis of clinicians and scientists from 14 African countries confirmed a lack of clinical trial methodology, knowledge and experience. In response, MUTHI deliverables include annual clinical trial methodology workshops in host countries and development of e-learning modules. The initiative provides a unique opportunity for developing African capacity to discover new medicinal products.
Herpes simplex virus types 1 (HSV-1) and 2 (HSV-2) are highly prevalent viruses capable of establishing lifelong infection. Genital herpes in women of childbearing age represents a major risk for mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) of HSV infection, with primary and first-episode genital HSV infections posing the highest risk. The advent of antiviral therapy with parenteral acyclovir has led to significant improvement in neonatal HSV disease mortality. Further studies are needed to improve the clinician's ability to identify infants at increased risk for HSV infection and prevent MTCT, and to develop novel antiviral agents with increased efficacy in infants with HSV infection.
The idea that nucleus accumbens (Acb) dopamine transmission contributes to the neural mediation of reward, at least in a general sense, has achieved wide acceptance. Nevertheless, debate remains over the precise nature of dopamine's role in reward and even over the nature of reward itself. In the present article, evidence is reviewed from studies of food intake, feeding microstructure, instrumental responding for food reinforcement, and dopamine efflux associated with feeding, which suggests that reward processing in the Acb is best understood as an interaction among distinct processes coded by discrete neurotransmitter systems. In agreement with several theories of Acb dopamine function, it is proposed here that allocation of motor effort in seeking food or food-associated conditioned stimuli can be dissociated from computations relevant to the hedonic evaluation of food during the consummatory act. The former appears to depend upon Acb dopamine transmission and the latter upon striatal opioid peptide release. Moreover, dopamine transmission may play a role in 'stamping in' associations between motor acts and goal attainment and perhaps also neural representations corresponding to rewarding outcomes. Finally, evidence is reviewed that amino acid transmission specifically in the Acb shell acts as a central 'circuit breaker' to flexibly enable or terminate the consummatory act, via descending connections to hypothalamic feeding control systems. The heuristic framework outlined above may help explain why dopamine-compromising manipulations that strongly diminish instrumental goal-seeking behaviors leave consummatory activity relatively unaffected.
Although there have been many studies on stem cells, few have investigated how neurotransmitters and stem cell proliferation interact to regenerate dental pulp. Dental pulp regeneration is an innovative procedure for reviving dental pulp, if feasible for the entire tooth. Upon tooth injury, activated platelets release serotonin and dopamine in bulk to mobilize dental pulp stem cells to mediate natural dental repair. This has induced research on the role of neurotransmitters in increasing the proliferation rate of stem cells. This review also covers prospective future treatments for dental pulp regeneration. A literature search was performed via PubMed and ScienceDirect from 2001 to 2022, using the keywords "neurotransmitter," "stem cell," "tooth regeneration," "tooth repair," "regenerative dentistry," and "dental pulp." Different inclusion/exclusion criteria were used, and the search was restricted to English articles. Nine publications reporting neurotransmitter interactions with stem cells for tooth and pulp regeneration were selected. Neurotransmitters were found to interact with dental stem cells. Evidence pointing to neurotransmitters as a factor in the increased proliferation of stem cells was found. This review thus gives hope for tooth pulp regeneration and repair.
Background: Diffuse low-grade gliomas (DLGGs) are heterogeneous tumors that inevitably differentiate into malignant entities, leading to disability and death. Recently, a shift toward up-front maximal safe resection of DLGGs has been favored. However, this transition is not supported by randomized controlled trial (RCT) data. Here, we sought to survey the neuro-oncology community on considerations for a surgical RCT for DLGGs. Methods: A 21-question survey focusing on a surgical RCT for DLGGs was developed and validated by 2 neurosurgeons. A sample case of a patient for whom management might be debatable was presented to gather additional insight. The survey was disseminated to members of the Society for Neuro-Oncology (SNO) and responses were collected from March 16 to July 10, 2018. Results: A total of 131 responses were collected. Sixty-three of 117 (54%) respondents thought an RCT would not be ethical, 39 of 117 (33%) would consider participating, and 56 of 117 (48%) believed an RCT would be valuable for determining the differing roles of biopsy, surgery, and observation. This was exemplified by an evenly distributed selection of the latter management options for our sample case. Eighty-three of 120 (69.2%) respondents did not believe in equipoise for DLGG patients. Quality of life and overall survival were deemed equally important end points for a putative RCT. Conclusions: Based on our survey, it is evident that management of certain DLGG patients is not well defined and an RCT may be justified. As with any surgical RCT, logistic challenges are anticipated. Robust patient-relevant end points and standardization of perioperative adjuncts are necessary if a surgical RCT is undertaken.
To assess the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) for the treatment of spinal fusions and the healing of fractures compared with the current standards of care. Data sources: Electronic databases, related journals and references from identified studies were searched in January 2006, with an updated search only for randomised controlled trials (RCTs) in November 2006. Review methods: A systematic review of available data was conducted. The data from selected studies were then analysed and graded according to quality and processed to give a value to the efficacy of BMP. Existing models were modified or updated to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of BMP for open tibial fractures and spinal fusion. All selected trials were found to have several methodological weaknesses. Insufficient sample size in most trials, meant that patient baseline comparability between trial arms was not achieved and the statistical power to detect a moderate effect was low. Data did indicate that BMP increased fracture union among patients with acute tibial fractures and found that high-dose BMP is more effective than a lower dose for open tibial fractures. The healing rate in the BMP group was not found to be statistically significantly different from that in the autogenous bone grafting group for patients with tibial non-union fractures, but BMP reduced the number of secondary interventions in patients with acute tibial fractures compared with controls. There was very limited evidence that BMP in scaphoid non-union was safe and may help to accelerate non-union healing when used in conjunction with either autograft or allograft. There was evidence that BMP-2 is more effective than autogenous bone graft for radiographic fusion in patients with single-level degenerative disc disease. No significant difference was found when BMP-7 was compared with autograft for degenerative spondylolisthesis with spinal stenosis and spondylolysis. The use of BMP was associated with a reduced operating time, improvement in clinical outcomes and a shorter hospital stay as compared with autograft. The proportion of secondary interventions tended to be lower in the BMP group than the control, but not of statistical significance. Trial data on time to return to work postoperatively were sometimes difficult to interpret because of unclear or inappropriate data analysis methods. The incremental cost of BMP for open tibial fractures was estimated to be about 3.5 million pounds per year in the UK. The estimated incremental cost per quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) gained is 32,603 pounds. The probability that cost per QALY gained is less than 30,000 pounds for open tibial fracture is 35.5%. The cost-effectiveness ratio is sensitive to the price of BMP and the severity of open tibial fractures. The use of recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein for spinal fusion surgery may increase the cost to the UK NHS by about 1.3 million pounds per year. The estimated incremental cost per QALY gained was about 120,390 pounds. The probability that BMP is cost-effective (i.e. cost/QALY less than 30,000 pounds) was only 6.4%. From the societal perspective, the estimated total cost of using BMP for spinal fusion is about 4.2 million pounds per year in the UK. Additional BMP treatment plus conventional intervention is more effective than conventional intervention alone for union of acute open tibial fractures. The cost-effectiveness of additional BMP may be improved if the price of BMP is reduced or if BMP is mainly used in severe cases. BMP may eliminate the need for autogenous bone grafting so that costs and complications related to harvesting autograft can be avoided. In non-unions, there is no evidence that BMP is more or less effective than bone graft; however, it is currently used when bone graft and other treatments have failed. The use of BMP-2 in spinal fusion surgery seems to be more effective than autogenous bone graft in terms of radiographic spinal fusion among patients with single-level degenerative disc disease. There is a lack of evidence about the effectiveness of BMP for other spinal disorders including spondylolisthesis and spinal stenosis. There was limited evidence showing that BMP is associated with greater improvement in clinical outcomes. According to the results of economic evaluation, the use of BMP for spinal fusion is unlikely to be cost-effective. The following areas would benefit from further research: clinical trials of BMP that include formal economic evaluation, a multicentre RCT of fracture non-union and of interbody and/or posterolateral spinal fusion, trials of non-tibial acute long bone fractures, and RCTs comparing BMP-2, BMP-7 and controls.
During craniofacial development, the Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway is essential for mesodermal tissue patterning and differentiation. The HH family consists of three protein ligands: Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), Indian Hedgehog (IHH), and Desert Hedgehog (DHH), of which two are expressed in the craniofacial complex (IHH and SHH). Dysregulations in HH signaling are well documented to result in a wide range of craniofacial abnormalities, including holoprosencephaly (HPE), hypotelorism, and cleft lip/palate. Furthermore, mutations in HH effectors, co-receptors, and ciliary proteins result in skeletal and craniofacial deformities. Cranial suture morphogenesis is a delicate developmental process that requires control of cell commitment, proliferation and differentiation. This review focuses on both what is known and what remains unknown regarding HH signaling in cranial suture morphogenesis and intramembranous ossification. As demonstrated from murine studies, expression of both SHH and IHH is critical to the formation and fusion of the cranial sutures and calvarial ossification. SHH expression has been observed in the cranial suture mesenchyme and its precise function is not fully defined, although some postulate SHH to delay cranial suture fusion. IHH expression is mainly found on the osteogenic fronts of the calvarial bones, and functions to induce cell proliferation and differentiation. Unfortunately, neonatal lethality of IHH deficient mice precludes a detailed examination of their postnatal calvarial phenotype. In summary, a number of basic questions are yet to be answered regarding domains of expression, developmental role, and functional overlap of HH morphogens in the calvaria. Nevertheless, SHH and IHH ligands are integral to cranial suture development and regulation of calvarial ossification. When HH signaling goes awry, the resultant suite of morphologic abnormalities highlights the important roles of HH signaling in cranial development